===================================================================
D0860r0 : Atomic Access Property for span and mdspan
===================================================================

:Project: ISO JTC1/SC22/WG21: Programming Language C++
:Number: D0860r0
:Date: 2017-11-09
:Reply-to: hcedwar@sandia.gov
:Author: H\. Carter Edwards
:Contact: hcedwar@sandia.gov
:Author: Christian Trott
:Contact: crtrott@sandia.gov
:Audience: Parallelism and Concurrency Study Group (SG1)
:Audience: Library Evolution Working Group (LEWG)
:URL: https://github.com/kokkos/array_ref/blob/master/proposals/P0860.rst


.. sectnum::


******************************************************************
Revision History
******************************************************************

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
D0856r0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2017-11-08 Albuquerque LEWG feedback for P0009, P0019, and P0546

  - Extract atomic array reference from P0019 to a separate paper


******************************************************************
Description / Motivation
******************************************************************

The intent for ``span`` and ``mdspan`` access properties is to
allow tailoring of how referenced members are accessed.

High performance computing (HPC) applications use very large arrays.
Computations with these arrays typically have distinct phases that
allocate and initialize members of the array,
update members of the array,
and read members of the array.
Parallel algorithms for initialization (e.g., zero fill)
have non-conflicting access when assigning member values.
Parallel algorithms for updates have conflicting access
to members which must be guarded by atomic operations.
Parallel algorithms with read-only access require best-performing
streaming read access, random read access, vectorization,
or other guaranteed non-conflicting HPC pattern.

An ``atomic_ref`` (P0019) is used to perform
atomic operations on the non-atomic members of the referenced array.
Construction of an ``atomic_ref`` for a non-atomic object
requires the non-atomic object satisfy several conditions
and potentially must acquire resources such as a lock
in order to perform atomic operations on that object.
Construction of ``atomic_ref`` has potentially large overhead
which could be performed once for an entire span.

We propose the ``atomic_access`` access property for
``span`` and ``mdspan`` such that

  - all references to elements are ``atomic_ref``
  - potential overhead associated with constructing ``atomic_ref``
    occurs only once when the ``span`` or ``mdspan``
    is constructed.

******************************************************************
Proposal
******************************************************************

Modify ``span`` and ``mdspan`` specification:

.. code-block:: c++

  namespace std {
  namespace experimental {
  inline namespace fundamentals_v3 {

    template< class ArrayType , typename ... AccessProperties >
    struct span {
      // revision
      // using reference = element_type & ; // remove
      using reference = /* implementation defined */ ;
    };

    template< class ArrayType , typename ... AccessProperties >
    struct mdspan {
      // revision
      // using reference = element_type & ; // remove
      using reference = /* implementation defined */ ;
    };

  }}}

..

Add to **[views]** a new **[views.atomics]** section.

.. code-block:: c++

  namespace std {
  namespace experimental {
  inline namespace fundamentals_v3 {

    struct atomic_access ;

  }}}

..

The ``atomic_access``  access property may appear at most once
in the ``AccessProperties...`` parameter pack of ``span`` or ``mdpsan``.
Let *S* be an instantiation of ``span`` or ``mdspan`` with
``AccessProperties...`` parameter pack containing ``atomic_access``.
Let *R* be ``atomic_ref<`` *S* ``::element_type>`` .

  *Requires:*

    - *S* ``::element_type`` satisfies requirements for
      ``atomic_ref<`` *S* ``::element_type>``,
    - *S* constructors also require *R* constructors' requirements
      for member objects of *S*.

  *Effects:*

    - *S* ``::reference`` is ``atomic_ref<`` *S* ``::element_type>``,
    - *S* iterator types dereference to ``atomic_ref<`` *S* ``::element_type>``


